WCIF v2 - `latest` branch (#38)
thewca/wcif: specification.md

- [Sign up](https://www.worldcubeassociation.org/profile/edit?section=preferences) in your profile preferences to our developer mailing list to receive updates about new versions and deprecations.
- Optionally, configure your apllication to monitor the `next_status` and `status_advancement_date` properties and alert you when these values change

## Changelog from v1.1

Changes from v1.1 are as follows:

### Major
- Replaced `AdvancementCondition` object with `ParticipationCondition`
- `Condition` object added, which is used by both `ParticipationCondition` and `Qualification`
- `Qualification` object changed to make use of `Condition`
- `ParticipationCondition` includes `ReservedPlaces`, which implements [Regulation 9p2b](https://www.worldcubeassociation.org/regulations/#9p2b)

### Minor
- Added value `h` to `round.format` enum - `h` corresponds to the Head-to-Head format described in the [2026 Regulations](https://www.worldcubeassociation.org/regulations/#article-I-headtohead).

> - Added `linkedRounds` field to `Round` object, which indicates a round's participation in a [Dual Round](https://www.worldcubeassociation.org/regulations/#9v).

Reviewer: Perhaps move this to a separate CHANGELOG.md file, so that we don't lose the history?

Author: Done

## Objects

The specification defines the following types:

- [Activity](#Activity)
- [ActivityCode](#ActivityCode)
- [Assignment](#Assignment)
- [AssignmentCode](#AssignmentCode)
- [Attempt](#Attempt)
- [Avatar](#Avatar)
- [Competition](#Competition)
- [CountryCode](#CountryCode)

> - [Condition](#Condition)

Reviewer: Name is a bit too generic. What kind of condition? A "you must be at least 16 years old to enter this competition" condition? A "the competition will only take place if it's not raining or hailing" condition? A "we will hold the barbecue at lunch only when there are at least 30 people interested" condition?

Reviewer: My suggestion: Go with something like `ResultCondition`

Author: Done

| `value` | `ResultValue`\|`Integer`\|`null` | The parameter of the qualification condition of the given type. Can only be `null` for `resultAchieved`, where it indicates that any valid single/average satisfies the Condition. |

### Condition - Option 2

An object representing the criteria a competitor needs to meet to satisfy a Qualification or ParticipationCondition. #TODO: Links!

| Attribute | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `type` | `"resultAchieved"\|"ranking"\|"percent"` | The type of Condition. Options are: <br>-`ranking` (Top N competitors) <br>-`resultAchieved` (a single/average ResultValue achieved by the competitor), or <br>-`percent` (top n% of competitors). |
| `scope` | `"single"\|"average"\|"`\|`null` | Only used for `resultAchieved` - specifies if the result should be a `single` or `average`. Null for non-`resultAchieved` types. |
| `value` | `ResultValue`\|`Integer`\|`null` | The parameter of the qualification condition of the given type. Can only be `null` for `resultAchieved`, where it indicates that any valid single/average satisfies the Condition. |

### Condition - Option 3

> An object representing the criteria a competitor needs to meet to satisfy a Qualification or ParticipationCondition. There are three `type`s of Condition, whose fields and behaviour are documented individually below.

Reviewer 2: I consider option 3 superior, since each type of condition only has the relevant fields. It restricts what can be expressed, rather than having nullable fields and documenting all the cases where each does or does not apply.

```suggestion
An object representing the criteria a competitor needs to meet to satisfy a `Qualification` or `ParticipationCondition`. It can be either of `ResultAchieved`, `Ranking`, `Percent`, distinguished by the `type` field.
```

Author: Suggestion added with minor wording change

#TODO: Links!

#### ResultAchieved

| Attribute | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `type` | `String` | Always `resultAchieved`
| `scope` | `"single"\|"average"\|"`\|`null` | Specifies if the result should be a `single` or `average`. 

> | `value` | `ResultValue`\|`null` | Species the `ResultValue` necessary to meet the ResultCondition. `null` indicates that any non-DNF/DNS result achieved in the given `scope` will meet the Condition.

Reviewer: Hmm... Using `null` implies "you do not need to care about the value", where in reality DNF (-1) and DNS (-2) are actual values somebody might have achieved (in terms of them being listed under a person's `results`).

Using `0` for "any successful value" is definitely more correct from a purist point of view. But I can also see however that putting a value `0` might intuitively be more confusing than a value `null`

Author: Hmm I do hear the purist's argument, although there are two more reasons I'm not convinced about using `0` (beyond the one you already raised): 
- [this is fixable] AttemptResult currently has the following to say about 0 - is this even still accurate?
> - `0` represents a skipped attempt (e.g. an attempt may be skipped if a competitor does not meet the cutoff)

- This field generally uses a _less than_ comparison to the `ResultValue` we provide. Providing `0` would yield the rather unintuitive case of needing to check if a value is less than the ResultValue, or greater than 0, if 0 is provided. 
  - Counterpoint to this is - even if we provide `null` here, the consumer will still need to perform a check for a valid result - which might end up being a `.positive?` check anyway

Reviewer: Okay yeah the "less than comparison" thing kinda kills my purist argument. Happy to proceed with `null` as-is!

}
```

> ### ParticipationData

Reviewer: The term "data" is a bit too abstract for my taste. I will defer to a strong consensus if enough people say this is fine, but maybe take another ~5 minutes to see if you can come up with a more precise name than "data".

What about "ParticipationRules" (or even "ParticipationRuleset")?

Reviewer 2: "data" is definitely too generic.

> What about "ParticipationRules" (or even "ParticipationRuleset")?

I like "ruleset" more, because "rules" is plural and I would expect `participationRules: ...` to be a list, while `participationRulset: ...` reads fine for an object.

Another option would be `ParticipationSpec`.

Author: I like `ParticipationRuleset`, running with it!

Represents how a given round "chooses" which competitors from its source (either a preceeding round, or the registration list) to include should compete in it.
See [regulation 9p2](https://www.worldcubeassociation.org/regulations/#9p2) for more details.
Regardless of the advancement condition type, [regulation 9p1](https://www.worldcubeassociation.org/regulations/#9p1) must be applied.

| Attribute | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `source` | [`Source`](#participationconditionsource) | The type of participation condition. Either of `registrations` (all registered competitors) `ranking` (top N competitors), `percent` (top X% of competitors) or `attemptResult` (competitors with result better than Y - either single or average as per [9p2+](https://www.worldcubeassociation.org/regulations/guidelines.html#9p2+)). |

> | `resultCondition` | [`ResultCondition`](#resultcondition)\|`null` | The requirement a competitor must satisfy to be included in the round. `null` indicates that all competitors from the `source` take part in the round. |

Reviewer 2: This is a part of the individual source types (already documented below).

```suggestion
```

Author: Removed

}
```

### ParticipationCondition

Represents how a given round "chooses" which competitors from its source (either a preceeding round, or the registration list) to include should compete in it.
See [regulation 9p2](https://www.worldcubeassociation.org/regulations/#9p2) for more details.
Regardless of the advancement condition type, [regulation 9p1](https://www.worldcubeassociation.org/regulations/#9p1) must be applied.

| Attribute | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `source` | [`Source`](#participationconditionsource) | The type of participation condition. Either of `registrations` (all registered competitors) `ranking` (top N competitors), `percent` (top X% of competitors) or `attemptResult` (competitors with result better than Y - either single or average as per [9p2+](https://www.worldcubeassociation.org/regulations/guidelines.html#9p2+)). |

> | `condition` | [`Condition`](#condition)\|`null` | The requirement a competitor must satisfy to be included in the round. `null` indicates that all competitors from the `source` take part in the round. |

Reviewer 2: Would condition be ever applicable to "registrations"? If not, consider moving it into the "rounds" source specifically.

Reviewer 2: Note that "registrations conditionally participating in an event" should already be covered by qualification.

Author: > If not, consider moving it into the "rounds" source specifically.

Do you mean move `Condition` (now `ResultCondition`) into the `round` and `linkedRounds` source types?

Reviewer 2: Yes!

Author: @gregorbg thoughts?

Reviewer: I like Jonatan's suggestion!

Author: Implemented

| `reservedPlaces` | [`ReservedPlaces`](#reservedplaces) | Places in a finals reserved for competitors from a particular nationality or continent, as defined in [9p2b](https://www.worldcubeassociation.org/regulations/#9p2b). |

#### ParticipationCondition.Source

| Attribute | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `type` | `"registrations"\|"round"\|"linkedRounds"` | Specifies where the `source` draws its data from - either the registrations list, the immediately preceeding round (`round`), or the union of all preceeding `linkedRounds`. |
| `roundId` | `String` | Only present for `type: "round"`. Indicates the round from which competitors should be considered. | 

> | `roundIds` | [`String`] | Only present for `type: "linkedRounds"`. The best result for each competitor from across all listed rounds will be used for determining participation. | 

Reviewer 2: I would document the source the same way as "Condition - Option 3" above. Instead of a single table, say it's a union of types and a separate table per each type with the relevant fields.

Author: Done

##### Example

```json
{
  "type": "registrations",
}
```

```json
// Normal (non-dual) round is the source
{
  "type": "rounds",
  "roundId": "333-r1"
}

```json
// Dual round is the source
{

>   "type": "rounds",

Reviewer 2: Based on the description above, I assume here it should be this:

```suggestion
  "type": "round",
  "roundId": "333-r1"
}

```json
// Dual round is the source
{
  "type": "linkedRounds",
```

Author: Thanks!

See [regulation 9p2](https://www.worldcubeassociation.org/regulations/#9p2) for more details.
Regardless of the advancement condition type, [regulation 9p1](https://www.worldcubeassociation.org/regulations/#9p1) must be applied.

| Attribute | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `source` | [`Source`](#participationconditionsource) | The type of participation condition. Either of `registrations` (all registered competitors) `ranking` (top N competitors), `percent` (top X% of competitors) or `attemptResult` (competitors with result better than Y - either single or average as per [9p2+](https://www.worldcubeassociation.org/regulations/guidelines.html#9p2+)). |
| `condition` | [`Condition`](#condition)\|`null` | The requirement a competitor must satisfy to be included in the round. `null` indicates that all competitors from the `source` take part in the round. |
| `reservedPlaces` | [`ReservedPlaces`](#reservedplaces) | Places in a finals reserved for competitors from a particular nationality or continent, as defined in [9p2b](https://www.worldcubeassociation.org/regulations/#9p2b). |

#### ParticipationCondition.Source

| Attribute | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |

> | `type` | `"registrations"\|"rounds"` | Specifies where the `source` draws its data from - either the registrations list, or at least 1 preceeding round. |

Reviewer: What about type being equal to `registrations` or `round` or `linkedRounds`?
For a "normal" round progression, you just take the results of the round like that and apply the condition filter. For linked rounds, you also need to apply the additional "unique per person" logic. This is an extra step which one could argue might be relevant enough to give it its own type

Author: Yep I'm convinced! Added the additional field - rest of the documentation will happen after `Condition` options modelling discussion

Author: Actually I did update the other fields as well - how do we feel about not duplicating the table, and instead saying "only present for [x type]"?

Saves space, but perhaps not as explicit as it could/should be.

Reviewer: Fine by me to compress the table in the way you've described

Reviewer: On second thought, maybe not. These are separate types, after all. It may be confusing to specify something and then say "Oh what I've specified here doesn't actually appear in the output except under certain conditions"

Reviewer 2: Definitely +1 for separate tables!

Author: Made them separate!

### Qualification

Represents a requirement that a person must satisfy to qualify to register for the given event.
See "Announcement Criteria" paragraph 5.1 in the [WCA Competition Requirements Policy](https://documents.worldcubeassociation.org/documents/policies/external/Competition%20Requirements.pdf) for more details.

| Attribute | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `whenDate` | [`Date`](#date) | The date by which the qualification requirement must be satisfied.  If a result is set in a multiple-day competition which ends before this date, that is considered to have been set by this date. |
| `condition` | [`Condition`](#condition) | Specifies the requirement a competitor must satisfy to register. Only Condition types `resultValue` and `ranking` are used for Qualification. |

#### Examples

```json
{
  "whenDate": "2020-04-25",
  "condition": {...}
}
```

### ReservedPlaces

Places in a finals reserved for competitors from the nationality or continent hosting the competition, as defined in [9p2b](https://www.worldcubeassociation.org/regulations/#9p2b).

| Attribute | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |

> | `nationalities` | `[Strings]` | List of all ISO-3166-1 country codes for whom reservations are in effect. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `nationalities` | `[CountryCode]` | List of all ISO-3166-1 country codes for whom reservations are in effect. |
```

Author: Done

| `count` | `Integer` | The number of places reserved for competitors from the `nationalities` list. Note that the reserved places are shared across all listed nationalities - the Top N competitors from _all_ listed countries will fill the reserved places.  |

#### Example

```json

> // Argentina national championship - reservations are only in effect for the hosting country of Germany

Reviewer: An Argentinian national championship in Germany? :P

Author: Lol I was using Germany until I thought about how many countries there are in Europe :P Fixed

{
  "nationalities": ["AR"],
  "reservations": 8
}
```

```json

> // South American continental championship - all European countries are listed for reservations

Reviewer: European countries reserved in a South American championship? Cool, I've always wanted to become South American champion!

Author: Fixed lol
